Actual problems of robotics

CMC MSU, December 2012

Alexander Chistyakov

Introduction
There’s no precise definition, but by general agreement a robot is a programmable  
machine   that   imitates   the   actions   or   appearance   of   an   intelligent   creature–usually   a  
human.   To   qualify   as   a   robot,   a   machine   has   to   be   able   to   do   two   things:   1)   get  
information   from   its   surroundings,   and   2)   do   something   physical–such   as   move   or  
manipulate objects.
The  word   robot   comes   from   the  Czech  word  robota,meaning   drudgery  or   slave-
like   labor.   It  was   first  used   to  describe   fabricated  workers   in   a   fictional  1920s  play  by  
Czech   author  Karel  Capek   called  “Rossum’s  Universal  Robots”.In   the   story,  a   scientist 
invents robots  to help people  by  performing simple,  repetitive  tasks.  However,  once  the  
robots are used to fight wars, they turn on their human owners and take over the world.
In   last  50  years   the   robotics  made  a  great   leap   forward.   If   in  1950's   robots  could  
only  perform  a   fixed   sequence  of  actions   like  assembling  car  engines  or  weight   lifting,  
today  we  have   robots  driving  cars,  extinguishing   fires,  doing   the  house  work  and  even  
travel to Mars.
However, there is a huge set of unsolved problems till now. This article is a review  
of current front line in this area.
We will see next branches of robotics:
Industrial
•
• Military
• Medical
• Entertainment

Industrial robots
The   ﬁrst   industrial   robot   in   Europe,   a   Unimate,   was   installed   at   Metallverken,  
Uppsland  Väsby,   Sweden.   It  weighed   two   tons   and  was   controlled   by   a   program   on   a  
magnetic   drum.   They   used   hydraulic   actuators   and   were   programmed   in   joint  
coordinates, i.e. the angles of the various joints were stored during a teaching phase and  
replayed in operation. The rate of accuracy was within 1/10,000 of an inch.
The ﬁrst National Symposium on Industrial 
Robots   was   held   in   1970   in   Chicago,   USA.  A  
year   later   it   was   upgraded   to   an   international  
conference   and   was   called   the   International 
Symposium   on   Industrial   Robots   (ISIR).   The  
purpose   of   this   symposium   was   to   provide  
researchers   and   engineers   worldwide   an 
opportunity   to   present   their   work   and   to   share  
their   ideas   in   the   ﬁelds   of   robotics.   In   1997   the  

symposium   changed   its   name   to   International   Symposium   on   Robotics   (ISR)   and  
included the technology of service robots. Today the ISR still represents a meeting point  
for  all  scientiﬁc,   technical  and   industrial   topics   related   to   robotics.  One  main  goal   is   to  
bring   academia   and   industry   together.   The   symposium   is   organized   annually   by   a  
national   robot   association   either   in  America,   Europe   or  Asia   in   conjunction   with   an  
international robot exhibition.
Takeo Kanade, Carnegie Mellon University, USA designed the world’s ﬁrst Direct  
Drive  Arm  He   also   founded   the  world’s   ﬁrst   doctoral   program   in   Robotics,  which   he  
chaired   from   1989-1993   at  Carnegie  Mellon.  Direct  Drive  Robotic  Arms   are   currently  
the   best   method   of   design   for   mechanical   arms,   due   to   the   removal   of   transmission  
mechanisms   between   the  motors   and   loads.   rather   than   using   reducers   and   chain   belts  
which   produce   uneven   movements.   The   result   is   an   arm   that   can   move   freely   and  
smoothly, allowing for high speed precision robots. Design of the arm was completed in  
1981, and successful patent was obtained a few years later.
In   2005   the   IEEE   Robotics   and   Automation   Society   (IEEE/RAS)   and   the  
International   Federation  of  Robotics   (IFR)   agreed   to   jointly   sponsor   the   Invention   and  
Entrepreneurship in Robotics and Automation (IERA) Award. The purpose of this award  
is to highlight and honor the achievements of the inventors with value creating ideas and  
entrepreneurs  who   propel   those   ideas   into  world-class   products.  At   the   same   time   the  
joint   disposition   of   the   award   underlines   the   determination   of   both   organizations   to  
promote stronger collaboration between robotics science and robotics industry.
Now,   the   development   on   industrial   robots   is   rather   stable   and   aimed   only   on  
improvement of precision.

Military robots
Broadly   defined,   military   robots   date  
back   to  World  War   II  and   the  Cold  War  in   the 
form  of   the  German  Goliath   tracked  mines  and 
the  Soviet  teletanks.  The  MQ-1  Predator  drone 
was  when   "CIA  officers   began   to   see   the   first  
practical   returns  on   their  decade-old   fantasy  of  
using aerial robots to collect intelligence".
The  use  of  robots  in  warfare,  although   traditionally  a   topic   for  science   fiction,   is 
being   researched   as   a   possible   future  means   of   fighting  wars.  Already   several  military 
robots have been developed by various armies.
After   the   World   War   the   implementation   or   robots   into   forces   had   been  
progressing rapidly. Now the armies of many countries have own automatic helicopters,  
cargo   transporters and  soldiers,  which  can  be  manipulated  from   the  control  room  or  act  
by itself.

The feature of the main part of military robots – is their price. In a difference from  
industrial   robots   a   metal   troop   can   be   explored   in   first   15   minutes   after   launch,   so  
engineers   try   to   construct   them   as   cheap   as   it   possible,   to  make   the  mass  manufacture  
available.  For   example,   in  2011   the  government  of  US  decided   to   send  more   than   two  
thousand robots in Afghanistan as an reinforcement.

Medical robots
Medical   robots   are  robots  that   allow   surgeons   greater 
access   to   areas   under   operation   using  more   precise   and   less 
invasive  methods.  They  are   in  most  telemanipulators,  which 
use the surgeon's actions on one side to control the "effector"  
on the other side.
In   1985   a   robot,   the  PUMA  560,  was   used   to   place   a 
needle   for   a  brain   biopsy  using  CT   guidance.   In  May,   2006  
Robot  carries  out  operation  by   itself.  The  50-minute  surgery, 
which   took   place   in   a  Milan   hospital,  was   carried   out   on   a  
34-year-old   patient   suffering   from   atrial   fibrillation.   Now   we   have   robots,   which   can  
perform  a  any  kind  of  operations,  but   there   is  a  big  disadvantage  of  medical   robots.  As  
the biggest part of them  is still needed  in remote control, surgeons shell  to learn how  to  
manipulate   it,   and   as   it   takes   from   8   to   12   times   to   adopt   the   system   completely,   this  
learning can get fatal for a someone. 
However,   surgery   is   not   the   only  way   of   using   robots   in  medicine.  They   can   be  
used for nursing care or rehabilitation. 

Entertainment robots
Of   course   such   interesting   theme   like   robotics  
could   not   be   stayed   far   from   community   for   a   long  
time.   In   1990   the   first   electronic   dog   Teksta   was 
invented.  After   that  a  wave  of  robots surged   to  market. 
Every new model had some improvements in goings-on 
simulation, commands detection and design.
An entertainment robot  is, as  the name  indicates,  
a robot that is not made for utilitarian use, as in production or domestic services, but for  
the sole subjective pleasure of the human it serves, usually the owner or his housemates,  
guests or clients. 
Another interesting robot line is ASIMO (Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility).  
The modern model of this robot can walk on 2 legs with speed up to 9 km/h, pour water  
from bottle to glass and recognize it's owner by camera. 

After   the  first  entertainment   robots  appeared,   they  got  a   role  of  effective  element  
for   advertisement.   Many   corporations   started   to   use   robots   to   attract   more   people   in  
stores or exhibitions.

Conclusion
As we see, robotics had filled all spheres of our lives and in all this spheres are 
needed in improvement. The common trends are developments in artificial intelligence 
and decreasing of the dependence from human. The enhancement of precision is actual 
too. But the intensity of today research give us some reasons to suppose, that robotics 
will change our world completely soon.  

References
• www.thetech.org/exhibits/online/robotics/universal/index.html
 
 
• www.ifr.org/uploads/media/History_of_Industrial_Robots_online_brochure_by_I
 
 
FR_2012.pdf
• www.darpagrandchallenge.com/
 
 
• phys.org/news67222790.html
 
 
• world.honda.com/ASIMO/
 
 

